pypy/doc/install.rst, before:

Downloading and Installing PyPy
===============================

.. _prebuilt-pypy:

Download a pre-built PyPy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The quickest way to start using PyPy is to download a prebuilt binary for your
OS and architecture.  You can either use the `most recent release`_ or one of
our `development nightly build`_.  Please note that the nightly builds are not
guaranteed to be as stable as official releases, use them at your own risk.

.. _most recent release: http://pypy.org/download.html
.. _development nightly build: http://buildbot.pypy.org/nightly/trunk/


Installing PyPy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PyPy is ready to be executed as soon as you unpack the tarball or the zip
file, with no need to install it in any specific location:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tar xf pypy-2.1.tar.bz2
    $ ./pypy-2.1/bin/pypy
    Python 2.7.3 (480845e6b1dd, Jul 31 2013, 11:05:31)
    [PyPy 2.1.0 with GCC 4.4.3] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``PyPy is an exciting technology
    that lets you to write fast, portable, multi-platform interpreters with less
    effort''
    >>>>

If you want to make PyPy available system-wide, you can put a symlink to the
``pypy`` executable in ``/usr/local/bin``.  It is important to put a symlink
and not move the binary there, else PyPy would not be able to find its
library.

If you want to install 3rd party libraries, the most convenient way is
to install pip_ using ensurepip_ (unless you want to install virtualenv as 
explained below; then you can directly use pip inside virtualenvs):

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./pypy-xxx/bin/pypy -m ensurepip
    $ ./pypy-xxx/bin/pip install pygments  # for example

Third party libraries will be installed in ``pypy-xxx/site-packages``, and
the scripts in ``pypy-xxx/bin``.


Installing using virtualenv
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is often convenient to run pypy inside a virtualenv.  To do this
you need a recent version of virtualenv -- 1.6.1 or greater.  You can
then install PyPy both from a precompiled tarball or from a mercurial
checkout::

	# from a tarball
	$ virtualenv -p /opt/pypy-xxx/bin/pypy my-pypy-env

	# from the mercurial checkout
	$ virtualenv -p /path/to/pypy/pypy/translator/goal/pypy-c my-pypy-env

Note that bin/python is now a symlink to bin/pypy.

.. _pip: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip
.. _ensurepip: https://docs.python.org/2.7/library/ensurepip.html

Building PyPy yourself
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you're interested in getting more involved, or doing something different with
PyPy, consult :doc:`the build instructions <build>`.

Commit message:

describe using a packaged PyPy, fixes issue #2424

pypy/doc/install.rst, after:

Downloading and Installing PyPy
===============================

Using a packaged PyPy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some Linux distributions provide a pypy package. Note that in order to
install additional modules that require compilation, you may need to install
additional packages such as pypy-dev. This will manifest as an error about
"missing Python.h". Distributions do not as of yet supply many pypy-ready
packages, if you require additionall modules we recommend creating a virtualenv
and using pip. 

.. _prebuilt-pypy:
Download a pre-built PyPy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The quickest way to start using PyPy is to download a prebuilt binary for your
OS and architecture.  You can either use the `most recent release`_ or one of
our `development nightly build`_.  Please note that the nightly builds are not
guaranteed to be as stable as official releases, use them at your own risk.

.. _most recent release: http://pypy.org/download.html
.. _development nightly build: http://buildbot.pypy.org/nightly/trunk/


Installing PyPy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PyPy is ready to be executed as soon as you unpack the tarball or the zip
file, with no need to install it in any specific location:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tar xf pypy-2.1.tar.bz2
    $ ./pypy-2.1/bin/pypy
    Python 2.7.3 (480845e6b1dd, Jul 31 2013, 11:05:31)
    [PyPy 2.1.0 with GCC 4.4.3] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    And now for something completely different: ``PyPy is an exciting technology
    that lets you to write fast, portable, multi-platform interpreters with less
    effort''
    >>>>

If you want to make PyPy available system-wide, you can put a symlink to the
``pypy`` executable in ``/usr/local/bin``.  It is important to put a symlink
and not move the binary there, else PyPy would not be able to find its
library.

Installing more modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to install 3rd party libraries, the most convenient way is
to install pip_ using ensurepip_ (unless you want to install virtualenv as 
explained below; then you can directly use pip inside virtualenvs):

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./pypy-xxx/bin/pypy -m ensurepip
    $ ./pypy-xxx/bin/pip install pygments  # for example

Third party libraries will be installed in ``pypy-xxx/site-packages``, and
the scripts in ``pypy-xxx/bin``.


Installing using virtualenv
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is often convenient to run pypy inside a virtualenv.  To do this
you need a recent version of virtualenv -- 1.6.1 or greater.  You can
then install PyPy both from a precompiled tarball or from a mercurial
checkout::

	# from a tarball
	$ virtualenv -p /opt/pypy-xxx/bin/pypy my-pypy-env

	# from the mercurial checkout
	$ virtualenv -p /path/to/pypy/pypy/translator/goal/pypy-c my-pypy-env

Note that bin/python is now a symlink to bin/pypy.

.. _pip: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip
.. _ensurepip: https://docs.python.org/2.7/library/ensurepip.html

Building PyPy yourself
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you're interested in getting more involved, or doing something different with
PyPy, consult :doc:`the build instructions <build>`.
